










































1

1   Background

1.1 Justification

1.1.1 The mandate of the African Union

The Constitutive Act of the African Union places emphasis on the sovereignty 
and the sovereign equality of member states1.  All member states thus have 
the right to decide their own policies.  The purpose of this Framework and 
Guidelines, therefore, is neither to develop a normative framework intended 
to be binding upon, nor to draft a land policy for adoption by member states.  
Further, it is not the objective of this Framework and Guidelines to instruct 
member states on how to formulate land policy in their specific country 
situations. 

The Framework and Guidelines recognizes nonetheless that most countries 
regard the proper management of land as an important factor in development 
and ensuring or preserving peace and security. This is evident in the fact that 
a growing number of African member states have embarked on land policy 
reforms with a view to addressing prevailing land issues in the context of 
sustainable national development. Significant diversity is apparent however 
in the drivers that compel states to embark on these reforms, the level of 
comprehensiveness, the capacities for initiating, planning and implementing 
them and, consequently, the extent to which they have been achieved. The 
Framework and Guidelines recognizes further that to date, these reforms 
have proceeded in the absence of any articulated continental guidance or 
national consensus on the vision which should inform such reforms.  In 
addition limited exchange of information and sharing of experiences and 
best practice have taken place across member states even where land and 
associated resources are shared by two or more states. There is also evidence 

1  The Constitutive Act of the African Union, 2000



